Clarify the ledger time docs (#16236)
digital-asset/daml: docs/source/daml/intro/5_Restrictions.rst

  :start-after: -- TRANSFER_TEST_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- TRANSFER_TEST_END

> Similarly, you can write a ``Redeem`` choice, which allows the ``owner`` to redeem an ``Iou`` *during business hours on weekdays*. Notice the ``Redeem`` choice implementation below confirms that ``getTime`` returns a value that is during business hours on weekdays. If all those checks pass, the choice doesn't do anything other than archive the ``SimpleIou``. (This assumes that actual cash changes hands off-ledger:)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, you can write a ``Redeem`` choice, which allows the ``owner`` to redeem an ``Iou`` *during business hours on weekdays*. The ``Redeem`` choice implementation below confirms that ``getTime`` returns a value that is during business hours on weekdays. If all those checks pass, the choice doesn't do anything other than archive the ``SimpleIou``. (This assumes that actual cash changes hands off-ledger:)
```

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-5/daml/Restrictions.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- REDEEM_CHOICE_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- REDEEM_CHOICE_END

> Notice in the above example, the time is taken apart into day of week and hour of day using standard library functions from ``DA.Date`` and ``DA.Time``. The hour of the day is checked to be in the range from 8 to 18. The day of week is checked to not be Saturday or Sunday.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above example, the time is taken apart into day of week and hour of day using standard library functions from ``DA.Date`` and ``DA.Time``. The hour of the day is checked to be in the range from 8 to 18. The day of week is checked to not be Saturday or Sunday.
```

> Now let's look at how the ``Redeem`` choice is exercised in a script:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how the ``Redeem`` choice is exercised in a script:
```

  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- REDEEM_TEST_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- REDEEM_TEST_END

For the purposes of testing the ``Redeem`` choice, the above code sets and advances the ledger time with the ``setTime`` and ``passTime`` functions respectively. Exercising the choice should fail or should not fail depending on the day of week and the time of day. While that is straightforward, the issue of time on a Daml ledger is worthy of more discussion.

Time on Daml Ledgers
--------------------

Each transaction on a Daml ledger has two timestamps:  the *ledger time (LT)* and the *record time (RT)*.

**Ledger time (LT)** is the time associated with a transaction in the ledger model, as determined by the participant. It is the time of a transaction from a business and application perspective. When you call ``getTime``, it is the LT that is returned. The LT is used when reasoning about related transactions and commits. The LT can be compared with other LTs to guarantee model consistency. For example, LTs are used to enforce that no transaction depends on a contract that does not exist. This is the requirement known as "causal monotonicity."

> **Record time (RT)** is the time assigned by the persistence layer. It represents the time that the transaction is “physically” recorded. For example, “The backing database ledger has assigned the timestamp of such-and-such time to this transaction.” The only purpose of the RT is to ensure that transactions are being recorded in a timely manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Record time (RT)** is the time assigned by the persistence layer. It represents the time that the transaction is recorded. For example, “The backing database ledger has assigned the timestamp of such-and-such time to this transaction.” The only purpose of the RT is to ensure that transactions are being recorded in a timely manner.
```

Author: I actually think it is helpful to have "physically" in this case. The reason is that the **Ledger time** is the official timestamp as far as the ledger model is concerned. The **Record time** just happens to be the time that the transaction is "physically" recorded.

I'm certainly open to discussing however.

Reviewer: it's ok with me either way

> Each Daml ledger has a policy on the allowed difference between LT and RT called the *skew*. A consistent zero-skew is not feasible given this is a distributed system. If it's too far off, the transaction will be rejected. This is the requirement known as “bounded skew.” The RT is not really relevant beyond this determination of skew.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Daml ledger has a policy on the allowed difference between LT and RT called the *skew*. A consistent zero-skew is not feasible because this is a distributed system. If it is too far off, the transaction will be rejected. This is the requirement known as “bounded skew.” The RT is not relevant beyond this determination of skew.
```

> Returning to the theme of *business hours*, consider the following example: Suppose that the ledger had a skew of 10 seconds. At 17:59:55 just before the end of business hours, Alice submits a transaction to redeem an Iou. One second later, the transaction is assigned an LT of 17:59:56. However, there still may be a few seconds before the transaction is persisted to the underlying storage. For example, the transaction might be written in the underlying backing store at 18:00:06, *after business hours*. Because LT is within business hours and LT - RT <= 10 seconds, the transaction won't be rejected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returning to the theme of *business hours*, consider the following example: Suppose that the ledger had a skew of 10 seconds. At 17:59:55, just before the end of business hours, Alice submits a transaction to redeem an Iou. One second later, the transaction is assigned an LT of 17:59:56. However, there still may be a few seconds before the transaction is persisted to the underlying storage. For example, the transaction might be written in the underlying backing store at 18:00:06, *after business hours*. Because LT is within business hours and LT - RT <= 10 seconds, the transaction will not be rejected.
```

  :start-after: -- TRANSFER_TEST_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- TRANSFER_TEST_END

Similarly, you can write a ``Redeem`` choice, which allows the ``owner`` to redeem an ``Iou`` *during business hours on weekdays*. Notice the ``Redeem`` choice implementation below confirms that ``getTime`` returns a value that is during business hours on weekdays. If all those checks pass, it doesn't do anything other than archive the ``SimpleIou``. (This assumes that actual cash changes hands off-ledger:)

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-5/daml/Restrictions.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- REDEEM_CHOICE_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- REDEEM_CHOICE_END

> There's quite a lot going on inside the ``do`` block of the ``Redeem`` choice, with several uses of the ``<-`` operator. ``do`` blocks and ``<-`` deserve a proper explanation which we will get to below. For now, let's look at how the ``Redeem`` choice is exercised in a script.

Reviewer 2: There is only one use of the bind operator in ``Redeam``. I would probably avoid drawing attention to it here, as the number of language features we haven't explained that are demonstrated in this code is prohibitive.

The one thing I would consider doing is converting the call to ``assertMsg`` into an if-expression with the case expression in the else clause. I think this is probably easier to read by people coming from non-fp languages than the higher-order function.

Author: Fixed with 9993d2672eca9bd445b777a5116bf2c18c548bfa

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-5/daml/Restrictions.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- REDEEM_TEST_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- REDEEM_TEST_END

In the above example, the time is taken apart into day of week and hour of day using standard library functions from ``DA.Date`` and ``DA.Time``. The hour of the day is checked to be in the range from 8 to 18.

> There are quite a few new time-related functions from the ``DA.Time`` and ``DA.Date`` libraries here. Their names should be reasonably descriptive so how they work won't be covered here, but given that Daml assumes it is run in a distributed setting, we will still discuss time in Daml.

Reviewer 2: This made more sense when it was referring to both the choice and the test. Now that you have moved intervening text between the two code snippets, the test only contains two time-related functions and neither of them are from DA.Time or DA.Date (they are in fact from DA.Script). So this text probably needs to be moved up to comment on the choice.

More over I find this style "so how they work won't be covered...." simultaneously condescending and belittling—particularly discouraging if they the reader does not find them "reasonably descriptive". I think it would be better to just provide a reference to their documentation.

Author: Fixed with 5daca107a2c08103d21bd3ae93905b776f91efaf

Time on Daml Ledgers
--------------------

> Each transaction on a Daml ledger has two timestamps. One of the timestamps is called the *ledger time (LT)*. The other is called the *record time (RT)*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each transaction on a Daml ledger has two timestamps:  the *ledger time (LT)* and the *record time (RT)*.
```

> **Ledger time (LT)** is the time associated with a transaction in the abstract ledger model. It is the time of a transaction from a business and application perspective. The LT time is determined by the participant. When you call ``getTime``, it is the LT time that is returned. The LT is used when reasoning about related transactions and commits. The LTs can be compared with other LTs to guarantee model consistency. For example, LTs are used to enforce that no transaction depends on a contract that does not exist. This is the requirement known as "causal monotonicity."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Ledger time (LT)** is the time associated with a transaction in the abstract ledger model, as determined by the participant. It is the time of a transaction from a business and application perspective. When you call ``getTime``, it is the LT that is returned. The LT is used when reasoning about related transactions and commits. The LT can be compared with other LTs to guarantee model consistency. For example, LTs are used to enforce that no transaction depends on a contract that does not exist. This is the requirement known as "causal monotonicity."
```

> **Ledger time (LT)** is the time associated with a transaction in the abstract ledger model. It is the time of a transaction from a business and application perspective. The LT time is determined by the participant. When you call ``getTime``, it is the LT time that is returned. The LT is used when reasoning about related transactions and commits. The LTs can be compared with other LTs to guarantee model consistency. For example, LTs are used to enforce that no transaction depends on a contract that does not exist. This is the requirement known as "causal monotonicity."

Reviewer 2: I would drop the word "abstract" from the phrase "abstract ledger model". The word connotes "less real", when in fact for the purposes of Daml the LT is _more_ real. 

```suggestion
**Ledger time (LT)** is the time associated with a transaction in the ledger model, as determined by the participant. It is the time of a transaction from a business and application perspective. When you call ``getTime``, it is the LT time that is returned. The LT is used when reasoning about related transactions and commits and is compared with other LTs to guarantee model consistency. For example, LTs are used to enforce that no transaction depends on a contract that does not exist. This is the requirement known as "causal monotonicity."
```

Author: Fixed with 2e4aa2da89cdde635c9b729ef5f7f13f0adf0a22

> **Record time (RT)** is the time assigned by the persistence layer. It represents the time that the transaction is “physically” recorded. For example, “The backing database ledger has assigned the timestamp of such-and-such time to this transaction.” For a Daml transaction to be valid, it must have an LT and RT that are not too different from each other. This is the only purpose in the RT - to ensure that transactions are being recorded in a timely manner. The RT should  roughly align with the LT. This is the requirement known as “bounded skew.”

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Record time (RT)** is the time assigned by the persistence layer. It represents the time that the transaction is “physically” recorded. For example, “The backing database ledger has assigned the timestamp of such-and-such time to this transaction.” The only purpose of the RT is to ensure that transactions are being recorded in a timely manner.
```

> Each Daml ledger has a policy on the allowed difference between LT and RT called the *skew*. If it's too far off, the transaction will be rejected. Consequently, the participant keeps a running estimate of the time required to record a transation. The participant assigns the LT based on that estimate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each Daml ledger has a policy on the allowed difference between LT and RT called the *skew*. If it's too far off, the transaction will be rejected. This is the requirement known as “bounded skew.” Consequently, the participant keeps a running estimate of the time required to record a transaction. The participant assigns the LT based on that estimate.
```

> Each Daml ledger has a policy on the allowed difference between LT and RT called the *skew*. If it's too far off, the transaction will be rejected. Consequently, the participant keeps a running estimate of the time required to record a transation. The participant assigns the LT based on that estimate.

Reviewer 2: I don't believe this is universally true. In fact, my understanding is that the LT actually comes from the application as a part of the command? Or has that changed since I last looked at that aspect.

```suggestion
Each Daml ledger has a policy on the allowed difference between LT and RT called the *skew*. If it's too far off, the transaction will be rejected.
```

Author: Fixed with 2e4aa2da89cdde635c9b729ef5f7f13f0adf0a22

> The RT is not really relevant outside the ledger. The reason for this is that ``getTime`` returns LT and is the logical time of the transaction. The primary role of RT from the application's perspective is to set an upper-bound on the amount of skew between the logical business concept of time and the wall-clock time. A consistent zero-skew is not feasible given this is a distributed system.

Reviewer 3: This entire segment except the last sentence is repetitive of the above; perhaps the last sentence could be incorporated into the previous paragraph?

Author: @carrielaben-da Never mind! Now that I study it more closely, I understand. GitHub was misleading me, but I've got it now.

Author: Addressed along with Andrae's comments with 2e4aa2da89cdde635c9b729ef5f7f13f0adf0a22

> Returning to the theme of *business hours*, consider the following example: Suppose that the ledger had a skew of 10 seconds. At 17:59:55 just before the end of business hours, Alice submits a transaction to redeem an Iou. One second later, the transaction is assigned a LT of 17:59:56, but then takes 10 seconds to commit. The transaction is recorded in the underlying backing store at 18:00:06, *after business hours*. Even though it was committed after business hours, it would be a valid transaction and be committed successfully as ``getTime`` will return 17:59:56. Since the RT is 18:00:06, ``LT - RT <= 10 seconds`` and the transaction won't be rejected.

Reviewer 2: This language is misleading. Talking about the the RT being the "commit" time is confusing. Yes, the RT was the time it was recorded/persisted, but to talk about that as a "commit-time" is to import RDBMS language into Daml that doesn't apply here.

The ledger time _is_ the time the transaction ran. The record time _is_ the time the ledger recorded/persisted that fact. Of these the LT is in fact the closest to what an RDBMS means by a "commit" time.

The language used above suggests that the Daml platform has violated the business rules in some way—which is manifestly not true.

Author: Fixed with d56fa7edc54e721e9e0df4c009defc457f0eddd7

- ``setTime``, which sets the ledger time to the given time.
- ``passTime``, which takes a ``RelTime`` (a relative time) and moves the ledger by that much.

> On a distributed Daml ledger, there are no guarantees that ledger time or record time are strictly increasing. The only guarantee is that ledger time is increasing *with causality*. That is, if a transaction ``TX2`` depends on a transaction ``TX1``, then the ledger enforces that the LT of ``TX2`` is greater than or equal to that of ``TX1``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On a distributed Daml ledger, there are no guarantees that LT or RT are strictly increasing. The only guarantee is that ledger time is increasing *with causality*. That is, if a transaction ``TX2`` depends on a transaction ``TX1``, then the ledger enforces that the LT of ``TX2`` is greater than or equal to that of ``TX1``.
```
